ARROW-15972: [Java][Doc] Add Getting Started section (#12739)
apache/arrow: docs/source/java/examples/quickstartguide.rst

.. Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
.. or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
.. distributed with this work for additional information
.. regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
.. to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
.. "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
.. with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

..   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

.. Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
.. software distributed under the License is distributed on an
.. "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
.. KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
.. specific language governing permissions and limitations
.. under the License.

.. default-domain:: java
.. highlight:: java

=================
Quick Start Guide
=================

.. contents::

> Arrow Java provides several building blocks; ``data types`` describe the types of values;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Arrow Java provides several building blocks. Data types describe the types of values;
```

``ValueVectors`` are sequences of typed values; ``fields`` describe the types of columns in

> tabular data; ``schemas`` describe a sequence of columns in tabular data and

Reviewer: (Oxford comma)

``VectorSchemaRoot`` represents tabular data. Arrow also provides ``readers`` and
``writers`` for loading data from and persisting data to storage.

> Create A Value Vector

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a ValueVector
```

*********************

> Also known as "arrays" in the columnar format. Represent a one-dimensional
> sequence of homogeneous values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ValueVectors represent a sequence of values of the same type.
They are also known as "arrays" in the columnar format.
```

> **Int Vector**: Create an value vector of int32s like this [1, null, 2]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Example: create a vector of 32-bit integers representing ``[1, null, 2]``:
```

.. code-block:: Java

    import org.apache.arrow.memory.BufferAllocator;
    import org.apache.arrow.memory.RootAllocator;
    import org.apache.arrow.vector.IntVector;

>     try(BufferAllocator rootAllocator = new RootAllocator();

Reviewer: and ditto below

>         IntVector intVector = new IntVector("fixed-size-primitive-layout", rootAllocator)){

Reviewer: Can we format the code before pasting it into these code blocks?

Author: Changed

        intVector.allocateNew(3);
        intVector.set(0,1);
        intVector.setNull(1);
        intVector.set(2,2);
        intVector.setValueCount(3);
        System.out.println("Vector created in memory: " + intVector);

>     }

Author: Added

> **Varchar Vector**: Create an value vector of string like this [one, two, three]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Example: create a vector of UTF-8 encoded strings representing ``["one", "two", "three"]``:
```

.. code-block:: Java

    import org.apache.arrow.memory.BufferAllocator;
    import org.apache.arrow.memory.RootAllocator;
    import org.apache.arrow.vector.VarCharVector;

    try(BufferAllocator rootAllocator = new RootAllocator();
        VarCharVector varCharVector = new VarCharVector("variable-size-primitive-layout", rootAllocator)){
        varCharVector.allocateNew(3);
        varCharVector.set(0, "one".getBytes());
        varCharVector.set(1, "two".getBytes());
        varCharVector.set(2, "three".getBytes());
        varCharVector.setValueCount(3);
        System.out.println("Vector created in memory: " + varCharVector);
    }

> Create A Field

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a Field
```

**************

> Fields are used to denote the particular columns of tabular data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Fields are used to denote the particular columns of tabular data.
They consist of a name, a data type, a flag indicating whether the column can have null values, and optional key-value metadata.
```

> **Field**: Create a column "document" of string type with metadata.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Example: create a field named "document" of string type:
```

> **Field**: Create a column "document" of string type with metadata.

Reviewer: and ditto below.

.. code-block:: Java

    import org.apache.arrow.vector.types.pojo.ArrowType;
    import org.apache.arrow.vector.types.pojo.Field;
    import org.apache.arrow.vector.types.pojo.FieldType;

    Map<String, String> metadata = new HashMap<>();
    metadata.put("A", "Id card");
    metadata.put("B", "Passport");
    metadata.put("C", "Visa");

>     Field document = new Field("document", new FieldType(true, new ArrowType.Utf8(), /*dictionary*/ null, metadata), /*children*/ null);

Reviewer: Can we break long lines to be more readable?

Author: Changed

> Create A Schema

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a Schema
```

***************

Schema holds a sequence of fields together with some optional metadata.

**Schema**: Create a schema describing datasets with two columns:
a int32 column "A" and a utf8-encoded string column "B"

.. code-block:: Java

    import org.apache.arrow.vector.types.pojo.ArrowType;
    import org.apache.arrow.vector.types.pojo.Field;
    import org.apache.arrow.vector.types.pojo.FieldType;
    import org.apache.arrow.vector.types.pojo.Schema;
    import static java.util.Arrays.asList;

    Map<String, String> metadata = new HashMap<>();
    metadata.put("K1", "V1");
    metadata.put("K2", "V2");
    Field a = new Field("A", FieldType.nullable(new ArrowType.Int(32, true)), null);
    Field b = new Field("B", FieldType.nullable(new ArrowType.Utf8()), null);
    Schema schema = new Schema(asList(a, b), metadata);

> Create A VectorSchemaRoot
> ***************************

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a VectorSchemaRoot
*************************
```

VectorSchemaRoot is somewhat analogous to tables and record batches in the other

> Arrow implementations.

Reviewer: This doesn't explain what it is in principle. Look to the Python docs for inspiration on how we can talk about things. For instance the Python docs say

> Multiple arrays can be combined in tables to form the columns in tabular data when attached to a column name

So we can say "VectorSchemaRoot combines ValueVectors with a Schema to represent tabular data" or something like that. We can still say it's analogous to tables, but we can't use that as the primary explanation.

Author: Added

**VectorSchemaRoot**: Create a dataset with metadata that contains integer age and
string names of data.

.. code-block:: Java

    import org.apache.arrow.memory.BufferAllocator;
    import org.apache.arrow.memory.RootAllocator;
    import org.apache.arrow.vector.IntVector;
    import org.apache.arrow.vector.VarCharVector;
    import org.apache.arrow.vector.VectorSchemaRoot;
    import org.apache.arrow.vector.types.pojo.ArrowType;
    import org.apache.arrow.vector.types.pojo.Field;
    import org.apache.arrow.vector.types.pojo.FieldType;
    import org.apache.arrow.vector.types.pojo.Schema;

    import java.nio.charset.StandardCharsets;
    import java.util.HashMap;
    import java.util.Map;
    import static java.util.Arrays.asList;

    Map<String, String> metadataField = new HashMap<>();
    metadataField.put("K1-Field", "K1F1");

>     metadataField.put("K2-Field", "K2F2");

Reviewer: IMO let's not put metadata in the example here, let's try to keep the example minimal.

Author: Deleted

>     Field a = new Field("Column-A-Age", FieldType.nullable(new ArrowType.Int(32, true)), null);

Author: Changed

    Field b = new Field("Column-B-Name", new FieldType(true, new ArrowType.Utf8(), /*dictionary*/ null, metadataField), null);
    Map<String, String> metadataSchema = new HashMap<>();
    metadataSchema.put("K1-Schema", "K1S1");
    metadataSchema.put("K2-Schema", "K2S2");
    Schema schema = new Schema(asList(a, b), metadataSchema);
    System.out.println("Field A: " + a);
    System.out.println("Field B: " + b + ", Metadata: " + b.getMetadata());

>     System.out.println("Schema: " + schema);

Author: Deleted

    try(BufferAllocator rootAllocator = new RootAllocator();
        VectorSchemaRoot vectorSchemaRoot = VectorSchemaRoot.create(schema, rootAllocator)){
        vectorSchemaRoot.setRowCount(3);
        try(IntVector intVectorA = (IntVector) vectorSchemaRoot.getVector("Column-A-Age");
            VarCharVector varCharVectorB = (VarCharVector) vectorSchemaRoot.getVector("Column-B-Name")) {
            intVectorA.allocateNew(3);
            intVectorA.set(0, 10);
            intVectorA.set(1, 20);
            intVectorA.set(2, 30);

            varCharVectorB.allocateNew(3);
            varCharVectorB.set(0, "Dave".getBytes(StandardCharsets.UTF_8));
            varCharVectorB.set(1, "Peter".getBytes(StandardCharsets.UTF_8));
            varCharVectorB.set(2, "Mary".getBytes(StandardCharsets.UTF_8));

            System.out.println("VectorSchemaRoot: \n" + vectorSchemaRoot.contentToTSVString());
        }
    }

Interprocess Communication (IPC)
********************************

Arrow data can be written to and read from disk, and both of these can be done in
a streaming and/or random-access fashion depending on application requirements.

> **Create a IPC File or Random Access Format**

Reviewer: Just "write data to an arrow file"?

Author: Changed

Write File or Random Access Format: Write to a file a dataset with metadata

> that contains integer age and string names of data.

Reviewer: "Example: write the dataset from the previous example to an Arrow random-access file:"

Author: Changed

    Map<String, String> metadataSchema = new HashMap<>();
    metadataSchema.put("K1-Schema", "K1S1");
    metadataSchema.put("K2-Schema", "K2S2");
    Schema schema = new Schema(asList(a, b), metadataSchema);
    System.out.println("Field A: " + a);
    System.out.println("Field B: " + b + ", Metadata: " + b.getMetadata());
    System.out.println("Schema: " + schema);
    try(BufferAllocator rootAllocator = new RootAllocator();
        VectorSchemaRoot vectorSchemaRoot = VectorSchemaRoot.create(schema, rootAllocator)){
        vectorSchemaRoot.setRowCount(3);
        try(IntVector intVectorA = (IntVector) vectorSchemaRoot.getVector("Column-A-Age");
            VarCharVector varCharVectorB = (VarCharVector) vectorSchemaRoot.getVector("Column-B-Name")) {
            intVectorA.allocateNew(3);
            intVectorA.set(0, 10);
            intVectorA.set(1, 20);
            intVectorA.set(2, 30);
            varCharVectorB.allocateNew(3);
            varCharVectorB.set(0, "Dave".getBytes(StandardCharsets.UTF_8));
            varCharVectorB.set(1, "Peter".getBytes(StandardCharsets.UTF_8));
            varCharVectorB.set(2, "Mary".getBytes(StandardCharsets.UTF_8));

>             // Arrow Java At Rest

Author: Deleted

            File file = new File("randon_access_to_file.arrow");
            try (FileOutputStream fileOutputStream = new FileOutputStream(file);
                 ArrowFileWriter writer = new ArrowFileWriter(vectorSchemaRoot, null, fileOutputStream.getChannel())
            ) {
                writer.start();
                writer.writeBatch();
                writer.end();

>                 System.out.println("Record batches written: " + writer.getRecordBlocks().size() + ". Number of rows written: " + vectorSchemaRoot.getRowCount());

Reviewer: Can we break up long lines?

Author: Changed

            } catch (IOException e) {
                e.printStackTrace();
            }
        }
    }

**Read a IPC File or Random Access Format**

Read File or Random Access Format: Mapping directly to memory a dataset file with metadata
that contains integer age and string names of data.

.. code-block:: Java

    import org.apache.arrow.memory.RootAllocator;
    import org.apache.arrow.vector.ipc.ArrowFileReader;
    import org.apache.arrow.vector.ipc.message.ArrowBlock;
    import org.apache.arrow.vector.VectorSchemaRoot;
    import java.io.File;
    import java.io.FileInputStream;
    import java.io.FileOutputStream;
    import java.io.IOException;

>     try(RootAllocator rootAllocator = new RootAllocator(Long.MAX_VALUE)){

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    try(BufferAllocator allocator = new RootAllocator(Long.MAX_VALUE)){
```

        File file = new File("randon_access_to_file.arrow");
        try (FileInputStream fileInputStream = new FileInputStream(file);
             ArrowFileReader reader = new ArrowFileReader(fileInputStream.getChannel(), rootAllocator)
        ){
            System.out.println("Record batches in file: " + reader.getRecordBlocks().size());
            for (ArrowBlock arrowBlock : reader.getRecordBlocks()) {
                reader.loadRecordBatch(arrowBlock);

>                 VectorSchemaRoot vectorSchemaRootRecover = reader.getVectorSchemaRoot();

Reviewer: ```suggestion
                VectorSchemaRoot root = reader.getVectorSchemaRoot();
```
